Add RNA-Seq clustering heatmap example notebook (#140)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 03-rnaseq/clustering/clustering_heatmap_example.Rmd

<br/> <i> Citation:</i> Love, M.I., Huber, W., Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-Seq data with DESeq2 Genome Biology 15(12):550 (2014)
<br/> <i> Citation:</i> Raivo Kolde (2019). pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps. R package version 1.0.12. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=pheatmap

```{r Install and attach the pheatmap and DESeq2 libraries}
if (!("pheatmap" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install pheatmap
  install.packages("pheatmap", update = FALSE)
}

if (!("DESeq2" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install DESeq2
  BiocManager::install("DESeq2", update = FALSE)
}
```

Attach the `pheatmap` and `DESeq2` libraries:

```{r}
# Attach the `pheatmap` library
library(pheatmap)

# Attach the `DESeq2` library
library(DESeq2)

# Magrittr pipe
`%>%` <- dplyr::`%>%`

# Set the seed so our results are reproducible:
set.seed(12345)
```

Create output folder.

```{r}
# Define the file path to the plots directory
plots_dir <- "plots" # Replace with path to desired output plots directory

# Create the plots folder if it doesn't exist
if (!dir.exists(plots_dir)) {
  dir.create(plots_dir)
}
```

## 2) Import and set up data

> Data downloaded from refine.bio include a metadata tab separated values ("tsv")

Author: Good point!

file and a data tsv file. This chunk of code will read the both tsv files and 
add them as data.frame objects to your environment.

The data that we downloaded from refine.bio for this analysis is a dataset, with
a total of four samples, containing RNA-sequencing results for mouse primary

> natural killer (NK) cells and NK cells treated with DKK2 for 24 hours.

Reviewer: Ignore this comment until we get a new, bigger dataset

metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  "data", # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_SRP110235.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
)) %>%
  dplyr::select(refinebio_accession_code, refinebio_title)

# Read in data tsv file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  "data", # Replace with path to your data file
  "SRP110235.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>% dplyr::select(metadata$refinebio_accession_code)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$refinebio_accession_code)
```

## 3) Choose genes of interest
Although you may want to create a heatmap including all of the genes in the set,
alternatively, the heatmap could be created using only genes of interest. 
For this example, we will sort genes by variance, but there are many alternative
criterion by which you may want to sort your genes <i>eg</i> fold change,
t-statistic, membership to a particular gene ontology, so on. 

```{r Choose genes}
# Calculate the variance for each gene

> variances <- apply(df, 1, var)

Author: I think it's a good idea 👍 (we do use the `apply` function elsewhere)

> variances <- apply(df, 1, var)

Author: This is the only comment I have yet to address because I have not yet thought of an appropriate tidyverse strategy to replace what the apply function is doing here.

> variances <- apply(df, 1, var)

Reviewer 2: Apply is fine here. This is essentially a matrix, and you are doing a row-wise calculation, which tidyverse is less adept at. 
A suggestion you could make is to use `matrixStats::rowVars()`, which is much faster than `apply()`, but I think apply is fine.

> # Determine summary statistics for gene variances

Author: Sounds good and no worries!

sum.stats.var <- summary(variances)

# Subset the data choosing only genes whose variances are in the upper quartile
df.by.var <- df[which(variances > sum.stats.var[5]), ]
```

> ## 4) Create a DESeq dataset

Author: Another good point 👍

A `DESeqDataSet` object is required to carry out the normalization step that
you will see later using a function from the `DESeq2` package. This chunk of
code will turn the data.frame (or matrix) into a `DESeqDataSet` object.

> ```{r Create a DESeq dataset}

Reviewer: This likely going to be a thing we do many times in the whole RNA-seq section's many modules so we may want to have it pretty well honed down. Can also add an explanation about `DESeqDataSet`'s and etc in the RNA-seq header section (#125) which we can link to here.

# The `DESeqDataSetFromMatrix` function needs the values to be converted to
# integers
df.by.var <- apply(df.by.var, 2, as.integer)

# Create a `DESeqDataSet` object
dds <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(
  countData = df.by.var,
  colData = metadata,
  design = ~refinebio_title
)

# Place the colData in a separate data.frame object for annotation
col_df <- as.data.frame(colData(dds))

# Define a `Groups` column variable
col_df <- col_df %>%

>   dplyr::mutate(Groups = rep(c("SP", "MP"), # Replace with group names relevant to your data

Reviewer: In other words, can you explain why you used this `colData(dds)` strategy you are using here? It isn't clear to me, but this could because I haven't tried this myself.

>   dplyr::mutate(Groups = rep(c("SP", "MP"), # Replace with group names relevant to your data

Author: I will give your first suggestion a try and let you know from there. I did try something similar before and that did not work, but I believe it was due to the way I generated the `Groups` column in that case.

    each = 2
  )) %>%
  tibble::column_to_rownames("refinebio_accession_code")
```

## 5) Define a minimum counts cutoff
We are going to do some pre-filtering to keep only rows with 10 or more reads
total.

```{r Define minimum counts cutoff}
# Define a minimum counts cutoff

> genes_to_keep <- rowSums(counts(dds)) >= 10

Author: Sounds good to me 👍

alternatively, the heatmap could be created using only genes of interest. 
For this example, we will sort genes by variance, but there are many alternative
criterion by which you may want to sort your genes <i>eg</i> fold change,
t-statistic, membership to a particular gene ontology, so on. 

```{r Choose genes}
# Calculate the variance for each gene
variances <- apply(df, 1, var)

# Determine the upper quartile variance cutoff value
upper_var <- quantile(variances, 0.75)

# Subset the data choosing only genes whose variances are in the upper quartile
df_by_var <- df %>%
  dplyr::filter(variances > upper_var)
```

## 4) Create a DESeqDataset
A `DESeqDataSet` object is required to carry out the normalization step that
you will see later using a function from the `DESeq2` package. This chunk of
code will turn the data.frame (or matrix) into a `DESeqDataSet` object.

```{r Create a DESeqDataset}
# The `DESeqDataSetFromMatrix` function needs the values to be converted to
# integers
## TODO: Link to explanation about `DESeqDataSet` in the RNA-seq header section
df_by_var <- df_by_var %>%
  # Mutate numeric variables to be integers

>   dplyr::mutate_if(is.numeric, as.integer)

Reviewer 2: `as.integer()` always rounds down, so it should be avoided.
```suggestion
  dplyr::mutate_if(is.numeric, round)
```

Author: Gotcha 👍

# replicates data
uncollapsed_count_sums <- data.frame(count = rowSums(counts(dds)))

ggplot2::ggplot(uncollapsed_count_sums, ggplot2::aes(x = count)) +
  ggplot2::geom_density() +
  ggplot2::geom_vline(ggplot2::aes(xintercept = 10), # This line represents the current cutoff of 10
                      color = "blue",
                      linetype = "dashed") +
  ggplot2::geom_vline(ggplot2::aes(xintercept = mean(count), # This line represents the mean count value
                                   color = "red",
                                   linetype = "dashed"))

# Define a minimum counts cutoff -- using the uncollapsed `DESeqDataSet` object
genes_to_keep <- rowSums(counts(dds)) >= 10
dds <- dds[genes_to_keep, ]
```

## 6) Perform DESeq2 normalization
We are going to use a function from the `DESeq2` package to normalize the data. 

```{r Perform DESeq2 normalization}
# Normalize the data in the `DESeqDataSet` object using the
# `normTransform` function from the `DESEq2` R package
## TODO: Add a note/link to section in documentation on why we use
# `normTransform` vs `vst` and `rlog`
# Let's normalize the data for the collapsed counts first 

> ntd_collapsed <- normTransform(dds_collapsed)

Author: I left this TO DO because I am not sure myself. My decision came from the original issue #127 where you mentioned `DESeq2` normalization, so I figured that the `normTransform`, being a function from the `DESeq2` package, was the best to implement here and it was also implemented in the vignette you put on the original issue.

> ntd_collapsed <- normTransform(dds_collapsed)

Reviewer: When you have time (so maybe not before we get training stuff wrapped up), I would look at these docs for: 
- [`normTransform`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/DESeq2/versions/1.12.3/topics/normTransform) 
and see if you can decipher how this is different than 
- [`rlog`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/DESeq2/versions/1.12.3/topics/rlog) or 
- [`vst`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/DESeq2/versions/1.12.3/topics/varianceStabilizingTransformation)

We can chat about it sometime. The paper might also be helpful to you: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4302049/

> ntd_collapsed <- normTransform(dds_collapsed)

Author: Gotcha! :thankyou:

```{r Install and attach the pheatmap and DESeq2 libraries}
if (!("pheatmap" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install pheatmap
  install.packages("pheatmap", update = FALSE)
}

if (!("DESeq2" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install DESeq2
  BiocManager::install("DESeq2", update = FALSE)
}
```

Attach the `pheatmap` and `DESeq2` libraries:

```{r}
# Attach the `pheatmap` library
library(pheatmap)

# Attach the `DESeq2` library
library(DESeq2)

# Magrittr pipe
`%>%` <- dplyr::`%>%`

# Set the seed so our results are reproducible:
set.seed(12345)
```

Create output folder.

```{r}
# Define the file path to the plots directory
plots_dir <- "plots" # Replace with path to desired output plots directory

# Create the plots folder if it doesn't exist
if (!dir.exists(plots_dir)) {
  dir.create(plots_dir)
}
```

## 2) Import and set up data
Data downloaded from refine.bio include a metadata [tab separated values ("tsv")]
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tab-separated_values) file and a data tsv file.
This chunk of code will read the both tsv files and add them as data.frame
objects to your environment.

> The data that we downloaded from refine.bio for this analysis is a dataset, with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data that we downloaded from refine.bio for this analysis has
```

> a total of 24 samples (obtained from 6 mice with 4 technical replicates for each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
24 samples (obtained from 6 mice with 4 technical replicates for each
```

mouse), containing RNA-sequencing results for Group 3 and 4 medulloblastoma
orthotopic xenograft mice with and without digoxin treatment.

You can download this dataset by going to the following link and clicking 

> `Download Now`: https://www.refine.bio/experiments/SRP150101/transcriptome-analysis-of-group-3-and-4-medulloblastoma-orthotopic-xenograft-mice-with-digoxin-treatment

Reviewer: This part is actually not necessary here, because it will be covered when we add in the getting started section for this module (being workshopped over on #122 ).

Reviewer: But you can keep it here for now I guess.

Author: In your [previous review comment](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/140#discussion_r456024079), you mentioned that there is a likelihood of someone skipping over this in the getting started section so it is good to have here as well.

```{r Import data from .tsv files}
# Read in metadata tsv file
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  "data", # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_SRP150101.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
)) %>%
  dplyr::select(refinebio_accession_code, refinebio_title, refinebio_treatment) %>%
  replace(is.na(.), "None") %>%

>   dplyr::mutate(

Reviewer: Can we put these `mutate` steps in their own chunk? This way the user has a chance to see what `metadata` looked like before. Would also be good to add a chunk in between where you print out a preview of `metadata`.

  "SRP150101.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>% dplyr::select(metadata$refinebio_accession_code)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$refinebio_accession_code)
```

## 3) Choose genes of interest
Although you may want to create a heatmap including all of the genes in the set,
alternatively, the heatmap could be created using only genes of interest. 
For this example, we will sort genes by variance, but there are many alternative
criterion by which you may want to sort your genes <i>eg</i> fold change,
t-statistic, membership to a particular gene ontology, so on. 

```{r Choose genes}
# Calculate the variance for each gene
variances <- apply(df, 1, var)

# Determine the upper quartile variance cutoff value
upper_var <- quantile(variances, 0.75)

# Subset the data choosing only genes whose variances are in the upper quartile
df_by_var <- df %>%
  dplyr::filter(variances > upper_var)
```

## How are our technical replicates clustering together?

> 

Reviewer: This is great to start out with the question like we discussed. Can you try to add some words here to explain why we are doing this and give a brief summary of what we will be doing?

### 4) Create a DESeqDataset
A `DESeqDataSet` object is required to carry out the normalization step that
you will see later using a function from the `DESeq2` package. This chunk of
code will turn the data.frame (or matrix) into a `DESeqDataSet` object.

```{r Create a DESeqDataset}
# The `DESeqDataSetFromMatrix` function needs the values to be converted to
# integers
## TODO: Link to explanation about `DESeqDataSet` in the RNA-seq header section
df_by_var <- df_by_var %>%
  # Mutate numeric variables to be integers
  dplyr::mutate_if(is.numeric, round)

# Create a `DESeqDataSet` object
dds <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(
  countData = df_by_var,
  colData = metadata,
  design = ~ refinebio_treatment
)
```

### 5) Prepare the metadata
We are going to format the metadata to be used for annotation on the heatmap.

```{r}
# Let's prepare the metadata for the uncollapsed `DESeqData` set object

> metadata_uncollapsed <- metadata %>%

Reviewer: This metadata will only be used for annotation correct? 
If yes, can we instead call this something like "annotation_df" or something like that? 

This is in part because I'd like to move away from using `collapsed` `uncollapsed` terminology and instead try to use terms that are more reflective of the samples and the question at hand. I think this will be helpful for our users to keep focused on the question/purpose of what we are doing.

>   dplyr::select(-c("sample_info_summary", "refinebio_title")) %>%

Reviewer: Can you add a comment to explain what you are doing here? aka why are we dropping these two columns?

>   tibble::column_to_rownames("refinebio_accession_code")

Reviewer: Also comment here for why we are storing these as rownames (cuz pheatmap I assume).

```

### 6) Define a minimum counts cutoff

> We are going to do some pre-filtering to keep only rows with 10 or more reads

Reviewer: Can you add a sentence or two about why we are doing this? Users may not know why.

total.

```{r Define minimum counts cutoff}
# Let's take a look at the distribution of counts first

> # Sum up the counts for each row

Reviewer: We might be a little more comfortable with rows = genes and columns = samples. But our users are probably not as comfortable with this. Can you bring these steps back to what they mean in terms of biology?

```{r Perform DESeq2 normalization}
# Normalize the data in the `DESeqDataSet` object using the
# `normTransform` function from the `DESEq2` R package
## TODO: Add a note/link to section in documentation on why we use
# `normTransform` vs `vst` and `rlog`
ntd_uncollapsed <- normTransform(dds)
```

### 8) Create a heatmap
To further customize the heatmap, see a vignette for a guide at this [link](https://slowkow.com/notes/pheatmap-tutorial/).

```{r Create a heatmap}
# Create and store the heatmap object
uncollapsed_pheatmap <-
  pheatmap(
    assay(ntd_uncollapsed),
    cluster_rows = FALSE, # Replace with `TRUE` to cluster heatmap by rows (genes in this case)
    cluster_cols = FALSE, # Replace with `TRUE` to cluster heatmap by columns (samples in this case)
    annotation_col = metadata_uncollapsed,
    main = "Technical Replicates Heatmap",
    colorRampPalette(c("deepskyblue",
                       "black",
                       "yellow"))(25
                       )
  )
```

"Now that we've seen our replicates are fairly identical... let's take a look at our experimental question". 

## How are our biological replicates clustering together?

> ### 4) Create a DESeqDataset

Reviewer: We may want to get rid of the numbering? What do you think?

Author: I had the same though as it could be a bit confusing, although I also do think that it can be helpful in allowing users to keep track of the steps sequentially if they go back to the notebook at some point and want to use it to answer just one of the questions.

Reviewer: Can we go back and make it 4a and 4b or is that more confusing?

> A `DESeqDataSet` object is required to carry out the normalization step that

Reviewer: I'm debating about whether we need to explain this or not again in the same notebook. Unsure. My default thought is to keep it.

# each row as the rows represent gene data and the columns represent sample data
# in our dataset
technical_count_sums <- data.frame(count = rowSums(counts(dds)))

# Create a density plot using the sums
ggplot2::ggplot(technical_count_sums, ggplot2::aes(x = count)) +
  ggplot2::geom_density() +
  ggplot2::geom_vline(ggplot2::aes(xintercept = 10), # This line represents the current cutoff of 10
                      color = "blue",
                      linetype = "dashed") +
  ggplot2::geom_vline(ggplot2::aes(xintercept = mean(count)), # This line represents the mean count value
                                   color = "red",
                                   linetype = "dashed")
```

```{r}
# Define a minimum counts cutoff and filter `DESeqDataSet` object to include
# only rows that have counts above the cutoff
genes_to_keep <- rowSums(counts(dds)) >= 10
dds <- dds[genes_to_keep, ]
```

### 7) Perform DESeq2 normalization
We are going to use a function from the `DESeq2` package to normalize the data. 

```{r Perform DESeq2 normalization}
# Normalize the data in the `DESeqDataSet` object using the
# `normTransform` function from the `DESEq2` R package

> ## TODO: Add a note/link to section in documentation on why we use

Author: Gotcha.

# Let's take a look at the distribution of counts first

# Sum up the counts for each gene -- which means we want the sum of counts for
# each row as the rows represent gene data and the columns represent sample data
# in our dataset
count_sums_all_reps <- data.frame(count = rowSums(counts(dds_all_reps)))

# Create a density plot using the sums
ggplot2::ggplot(count_sums_all_reps, ggplot2::aes(x = count)) +
  ggplot2::geom_density() +
  ggplot2::geom_vline(ggplot2::aes(xintercept = 10), # This line represents the current cutoff of 10
                      color = "blue",
                      linetype = "dashed") +
  ggplot2::geom_vline(ggplot2::aes(xintercept = mean(count)), # This line represents the mean count value
                                   color = "red",
                                   linetype = "dashed")
```

```{r Define a minimum counts cutoff for all replicates object}
# Define a minimum counts cutoff and filter `DESeqDataSet` object to include
# only rows that have counts above the cutoff
genes_to_keep_all_reps <- rowSums(counts(dds_all_reps)) >= 10
dds_all_reps <- dds_all_reps[genes_to_keep_all_reps, ]

> ```

Author: This was included per @cansavvy's review suggestion [here](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/140#discussion_r456042011), but a summary of the reasoning here is to plot the distribution of counts before defining a cutoff.
